---
title: "Successful Rails Rumble Tips"
category: ruby
description: "Suggestions for competing in the Rails Rumble competition based on experience from a horrible first year and a category winner year."
archived: true
---

With this being my fourth year participating in the Rails Rumble I'd like to
share tips for successfully completing a Rails Rumble project.

## The Idea

While the most obvious item to not skimp on, the idea can often be overlooked.
In 2009 my teammate and I neglected to settle on an idea until the first hour
of the competition. While fun, the entry was hands down the worst we made in
the three years of competing together.

Thinking of an interesting or original idea is undoubtedly the hardest part of
the competition, but make sure it is a site **you** would actually use.
Building for yourself is nothing new, but can really help your execution.

## Preparation

Once you have an idea (hopefully a week or two before the competition) you
should immediately start sketching, with your team if you have one. This helps
with design, but is also great for deciding the priority of must-have features
and what the nice-to-have features&#160;are.

Seriously, plan the order of features and tasks. It makes the weekend easier
to manage, especially the last six hours.

## The First Hour

The first year I participated in the Rumble we had no idea on how to setup
our Linode VPS. It ended up costing us close to eight hours, which is a lot of
lost development time.

If you're serious about it, you could buy a Linode VPS and practice.
Fortunately I realized, while a great part of the competition, it's really
not worth spending more than an hour on. The result is [sprinkle-linode][1],
a collection of [Sprinkle][2] scripts for setting up a Debian 5.0 server for
Rails development on Linode. It provides a base to get up and running quickly.

Teammates? While one of you are setting up the server the others should start
setting up the repository and getting to work.

Additionally you should deploy as soon as you have the server setup and an
application generated. You don't want to be down to the wire and trying to get
your application deployed.

## The First Eight Hours, or The Sleep Schedule

Living in the US means the competition usually starts in the evening. It's
tempting to work through the night, but I have to recommend against it. You
probably just worked a full week at your day job and can end up burnt out early
on.

The first year we thought it would be a good idea to alternate taking one to
two hour naps. This resulted in lots of caffeine and near exhaustion by the
end, which did not help our speed or code quality.

The second year I believe we executed the perfect schedule, resulting in
winning the most complete category. The first night go to sleep around the
normal time you would on a Friday night and wake up the next day at a reasonable
time. By that night you will have close to 3 business days of progress done. Now
here's the secret: Start showing it to people! If your idea is semi-interesting
people will start complementing you and it boosts your confidence a ton. It
boosted ours so much that we worked through the night to the end of the
competition, thanks to our prior full night of sleep.

## The Final Countdown

Once you have the majority of must-have features implemented you can move on to
the fun items. This is where having development planned out ahead of time helps
even more. Put all the remaining and nice-to-have items on a whiteboard, or on
sticky notes. Each teammate takes one, works on it, erases it, and repeats. It's
amazing how fast you can tear through these and seeing the progress gives you the
boost of energy you need to power through the last few hours.

Finally, be sure to reserve two to four hours at the end for testing and cleanup.
The last thing you want is a stray `console.log`, invalid link path, or weird CSS
issue in a certain browser to cost you votes. And it happens more often than you
would imagine.

## Conclusion

Like all software development, good planning, a sustainable pace, prioritization,
testing, and just staying focused can really help the final product. And don't
forget to have fun!

[1]: https://github.com/tristandunn/sprinkle-linode
[2]: https://github.com/crafterm/sprinkle
